(section-motivation)=
# Motivation and challenges
ALCS systems were designed and thoroughly tested in problems where the concept or a function sought is essentially "logical" - meaning that it can be expressed by a combination of logical operators applied to attribute values {cite}`wilson2000mining`. However, in many problems the solution can't be conveyed solely by _and_, _or_, _not_ operators, because it's discrimination surface is oblique - neither parallel nor perpendicular to the attribute axes. If the problem's discrimination surface is oblique the classifier rule are capable of capturing parts of space within hyper-rectangles, that can only approximate the function shape using numerous distinct classifiers.

`````{margin}
````{admonition} S-expression
An **s-expression**, also known as a **sexpr** or **sexp**, is a way to represent a nested list of data. It stands for "symbolic expression," and it is commonly encountered in the Lisp programming language. It use s-expressions to represent the computer program, and the program's data.


For example, the simple mathematical expression "five times the sum of seven and three" can be written as a s-expression with prefix notation. In Lisp, the s-expression might look like the example below

```
(* 5 (+ 7 3))
```
[source](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/s/s-expression.htm)
````
`````

The most popular family of LCS, and the ALCS predecessor - [](section-topics-history-xcs) was comprehensively evaluated for problems with non-linear decision surface. In 1999 Lanzi took approach to use _S-classifiers_ {cite}`lanzi1999extending`, where the classifier's condition part are Lisp S-expressions and can be based on arithmetic function primitives. In 2000 Wilson focuses solely on continuous value inputs introducing XCSR implementation {cite}`wilson1999get`. There the condition attribute was an interval represented by a pair of number - it's center and the spread. He examined if the optimal decisive thresholds are found automatically in a modified Multiplexer benchmark problem. In the same year he introduced a XCSI system {cite}`wilson2000mining`, focusing on forming bounded intervals for integer inputs. One year later, in 2001, another an implementation named XCSF {cite}`wilson2001function` allowing piecewise-linear function approximation was proposed. For a function $y=f(x)$ the system assumed that $x$ is the input, $y$ the payoff and after sufficient amount of sampling the input space XCSF should converge to a population of rule, that over their respective input ranges, predict payoff well. In 2003 Stone and Bull scrupulously addressed the limitations of XCSR system {cite}`stone2003real` and introduced two new interval representations alongside more versatile benchmark problem. The ordered-bounded (OBR) and unordered-bounded (UBR) representation describe the interval using left $x_1$ and right $x_2$ bounds, but in OBR $x_1 < x_2$. By neglecting the explicit ordering, system evolves better classifiers when using the UBR representation. In 2005 Dam and Abbass proposed also a Min-Percentage approach {cite}`dam2005real` trying to overcome some of UBR drawbacks.

For the ALCS systems only the preliminary studies transforming the continuous signal were performed by Unold in 2016 {cite}`unold2016real`. This works tries to bridge the gap between advancements from various LCS implementations mentioned earlier, and the anticipatory systems, by introducing features and modifications for handling input signal using especially either discretization or interval encoding representations. Due to more complex rule structure of ALCS (additional prediction part) and presence of another discovery components certain limitations were observed and also addressed herein. The biased exploration enhancement investigates the impact of optimizing action selection method using certain strategies in order to stimulate knowledge formation {cite}`kozlowski2020investigating`. On the other side there is also a problem with long-action chains and diminishing reward that might occur when using fine-grained nominal representation for continuous data {cite}`kozlowski2021anticipatory` - in this case incorporating an average reward criterion resulted in a more distinct payoff landscape.